[Home](./)

# Stretching Time

You've probably heard that the speed of light is constant. You've probably also
heard of relativity, but how do these two things interact?

Imagine you're in space. There's nothing around to tell you whether or not
you're moving. You're just floating there. If you throw a ball, it will have
some speed, let's say it's 50 m/s. Whether you're moving or not doesn't really
matter because you're going to measure that ball going 50m/s. Even if you're
moving at 1000 m/s it will still look the same. However, from someone not
moving it would look like the ball is going 1050 m/s. Your velocity plus the
velocity of your throw.

Now what if instead of a ball, we're shooting a laser. We're off in space with
nothing to tell us how fast we're going, and we see the laser beam shoot off at
the speed of light. What if we're traveling at half the speed of light. Well
that's irrelevant we still measure the light moving away at it's constant
speed. However, from the perspective of someone standing still, the light is
going one and a half times the speed of light… oh wait. That's not right. The
light is still going along at its constant speed.

So what the poop is going on here. I mean, we're going 1/2 the speed of light
so anything we shoot away from us in the direction of motion should go 1/2 the
speed of light + the speed we shoot it. But light doesn't work that way at all.
Light says poopoo to your intuition, ha! you thought you were smart.

Think about speed for a second. Speed is just distance divided by time. So
varying distance or varying time would cause you to measure different speeds.
If I have a meter stick that's really 50 cm long, and you have one that's
“normal” then any speed (distance / time) I measure will be double what you
measure even though we both witnessed the same event. Alternatively our
distances could be the same, but our times different. If my clock ticks at half
the speed yours does, then what you measured as 10 s I will have measured as 5.
Therefore, if something traveled 10 m in that time, you will say it went 10 m /
10 s or 1 m/s. Whereas I will say it went 10 m / 5 s or 2 m/s.

But we can compare our clocks and check that in fact they are in sync. By that
I mean we can see that they reach the 1 minute or 1 hour mark at the same
instant. Even more simply we can compare our meter sticks and ensure that in
fact they are the same length. You go racing off at 90% the speed of light and
shoot the laser, while I stay still and observe. I can see the light is
traveling at its constant speed as usual and I will measure the light moving
away from you at 10% of that. However, you will shoot the laser and see it
going away from you at its normal constant speed 100%.

What the heck is going on? Before you left we compared our clocks and our meter
sticks and made sure everything matched and now we're getting a result that is
off by 90%. But remember what we said before, if your distance was 10 times
shorter than mine, then you would measure 10X the speed I did. Alternatively,
if your clock ticked 10X slower than mine you would also measure 10X the speed.
So at least one of these must be happening as you speed up. Either your
distance in the direction of motion is shrinking or your time is slowing down
or both.

As it turns out, both are happening! First let's talk about time slowing down.
We can easily imagine a clock made out of two mirrors. We place the mirrors 1 m
apart and flash a light between them. Every time the light hits one of the
mirrors, we count a tick. No matter if we're moving or standing still, as long
as the clock is moving with us, we observe the same rate of ticking. If we
create two of these clocks and start them at the same time, they will stay in
sync. So as you go racing off you take one clock with you and I keep one with
me. From my perspective my clock's light is going straight up and down, but
yours is going in a zig-zag. This means that the light in your clock must
travel further to get from one mirror to the other than mine ie. your clock is
ticking slower.

But how do we know your time is actually slower than mine and not just that the
clock ticks are farther apart. If we both had an additional clock, let's say a
wrist watch, that would tick at the exact same rate as our light clock. We
start those off at the same time as well and everything is in sync. You go
racing off with your light clock now ticking slower. If your wrist watch
continued to tick at the same rate as when you started, then you could use the
difference in times between the wristwatch and the light clock to tell how fast
you were moving. However, relativity tells us that making this sort of
measurement is impossible. So long as you're traveling at a constant speed with
no outside reference points, it's impossible to tell how fast you're moving.
Therefore, both clocks must slow down which means that your time is literally
slowed as well. Everything you do, think, or feel is literally slower. The
cells in your body process energy slower, the speed at which something falls is
slower, EVERYTHING is slower. But from your perspective everything seems
normal. It's like if you're on a plane. The plane may be traveling at 800 mph,
but you're just sitting in your chair, watching your movie, without feeling
like anything is different.

So what about distances shrinking? If time slows down we know that any speed
you measure will increase so couldn't the time dilation be enough to explain
our different measurements? We can calculate what the difference in time is
for someone moving by figuring out how much longer it would take their clock to
tick than ours standing still. As it turns out this difference is not enough to
account for the discrepancy between what I think you should measure and what
you actually measure.

- Go into math with pythagorean theorem to show time diff
- show how speed would differ just by changing this time
- show how shortened distance needs to account for the rest
