# Why and How

Why and how are two very important questions. However, I believe why is the
more important question to ask. If we are talking about people the questions
become very different indeed. "How did you do that?" vs "Why did you do that?"
If we can answer why, then the how is almost irrelevant. I know why I became a
programmer, because I am fascinated by machines that can do so many things.
More importantly to me is that simple fact that they can do so many things. Why
would you not pursue something that affords you so many options. I like having
options and knowing that computers are one way to get them excites me. So
again, Why? I get excited! That's really it. The staggering number of
possibilities genuinely excites me. If you want to know why I've done what I've
done for the past 8 years of my life, this one simple fact is sufficient. I
don't even want to begin to describe the drudgery, monotony, pain, sacrifice,
and turmoil I have endured over the past 8 years because there was certainly a
lot. However, the reason I even put up with ANY of it is simply because I am
excited.  I'm excited about what computers can do, and what the future of
computing holds for humanity. One. simple. reason. Now if I were to describe
how I got here, it would take me a very long time to explain all the things
I've learned and done. So you see that the "how" is not so important.


I believe that often others are motivated in the same way. They have a driving
motivation that is fueled by an EMOTION! One simple emotion. Joy, Excitement,
Hope, or Freedom. Perhaps even the opposite is true. It may be the case that
someone has a negative emotion and they want to do everything in their power to
avoid it. Maybe one of your parents died of cancer and so you want to help
fight it. Maybe you were bullied so now you want to stop bullying in schools.

These emotions come from our experiences. When I was young my dad would read me
books. I know it's cheesy, but it was something we enjoyed doing together. I
was always interested in science for the same reasons I'm interested in
computers, possibilities! Science allows us to learn and grow and get better
and improve the lives of others. One book I remember reading was about
relativity. It was a book meant for kids and it explained all the strange
phenomena that Enstien discovered about light and gravity. Many happy memories
of my childhood are associated with science and so I continue to pursue it to
this day. Perhaps you have a similar childhood experience or even just a
positive experience in general which motivated you to do what you do.

One reason I believe there are so many disagreements on important things like
healthcare, school, gun rights, and foreign policy is that people grow up and
live different lives. You literally could not have lived my life because in
order to do so you would have to be me. Similarly I could not have lived yours.
What happened to you did not happen to me and as a result our emotions on these
important topics may be VERY different. We learn from our experiences and we
feel how we do now because of them. But, what if I COULD experience what you did.
What if I REALLY WAS in your shoes and saw through your eyes. That may not be
the final answer, but I think it's a damn good one. I'm sure you've heard the
phrase "If you could just walk a mile in my shoes." Well I believe this is now
possible.

With the advent of virtual reality comes many exciting things, one of which I
believe to be this shared experience. With a virtual reality device, you COULD
experience a pivotal moment through someone else's eyes. For that matter even a
trivial moment. There are a lot of things that go into making it happen, but
that's just the HOW. I've learned enough about computing to KNOW FOR A FACT
that this is possible and not in the future! This IS possible right now. If we
could experience a situation as someone else, we may come to understand their
"why." We may come to understand others better and find better solutions to
these really difficult problems that CAN NOT be solved with a more efficient
algorithm. Problems that operate on an emotional level not an intellectual one.

----

Lately, my why has been compelled by one person, my daughter. I went through a
relationship separation with a kid which is never easy. Granted it's not the
hardest thing anyone's ever done, but that certainly doesn't discount the pain.
The amount that I miss her towers far beyond almost any emotion I've ever felt.
I want to be able to spend time with her whenever, not just when I've been
"allotted." The solution to this problem is also virtual reality. With a simple
camera and a phone both of us could play inside a virtual world as ourselves!
We could build legos, play with dolls, read books, go on adventures and the
list goes on. These are all things we could normally only do together (except
perhaps reading). I know you've missed someone before. Imaging if whenever you
really missed someone, both of you could slap on a headset and voila, you're
together free to do pretty much anything you want. Granted you can not
physically interact and give them a hug, but besides that you're only limited
by what you can imagine. Given enough of these interactions, if you so choose,
they may be archived and experienced again later. I literally don't know what I
would do if she died, but I do know that if I could step back in time into one
of those interactions we had it would help. If you had someone you love pass
away, you could do the same.

Facebook is experimenting with social virtual reality and I believe they are
heading the right way. I don't think VR will take off until it is social and
allows us to experience more deeply than what we currently do. By that I mean
move around! What a trivial limitation it is. I can literally put myself on
mars, but I can't walk around and explore using my own body. This is certainly
one problem we should solve. However, the other is cost. Modern virtual reality
devices often cost thousands of dollars. But, we do have mobile VR. There are
really only two main differences between them. One is the external cameras that
track body movement and the other is the compute power. Phones often don't have
the juice to crank out these real time virtual environments to the level of the
more powerful devices. However, I would much rather have a social, cost
effective, widely available, unlimited virtual environment that is simple than
one that is anti-social, expensive, high learning curve, and physically limited but
looks REALLY GOOD. So if we're willing to make that compromise then there's
only one other difference, the external camera (which we probably need). But,
cameras are cheap and so are the mobile VR headsets. If you already have a
smart phone (which I'm guessing you do) then you might need to spend 50
dollars. Compare that to much more than $1000 for a top of the line VR system.

This is what I want to build because I think it will truly change the world. We
will communicate differently and be able to experience things through others
eyes. Not only that we can in some ways "bring back" the ones we love.
